17
Poem1 Life* Henry Van Dyke
Let me but live my life from year to year, 
With forward face and unreluctant soul; 
Not hurrying to, nor turning from the goal; 
Not mourning for the things that disappear 
In the dim past, nor holding back in fear
From what the future veils; but with a whole 
And happy heart, that pays its toll
To Youth and Age, and travels on with cheer.
So let the way wind up the hill or down,
O'er rough or smooth, the journey will be joy:
Still seeking what I sought when but a boy,
New friendship, high adventure, and a crown, 
My heart will keep the courage of the quest, 
And hope the road's last turn will be the best.
10th English_Book.indb   17 26-02-2019   16:24:02
18
mourning (v) -  feeling or expressing great sadness
veils (v) -  to hide or cover something so that you cannot see it clearly or 
understand it
crown (n) -  a prize or position offered for being the best
quest (n) -  a long search for something that is difficult to find
unreluctant* (adj.) -  willing to do something (*This form is generally not used but 
the poet has coined it for emphasis)
A.  Read the following lines from the poem and answer the questions that follows.
1.  Let me but live my life from year to year,
With forward face and unreluctant soul;
a. Whom does the word ‘me’ refer to?
b.  What kind of life does the poet want to lead?
2.  Not hurrying to, nor turning from the goal;
Not mourning for the things that disappear
a. Why do you think the poet is not in a hurry?
b. What should one not mourn for?
3.  In the dim past, nor holding back in fear 
From what the future veils; but with a whole 
And happy heart, that pays its toll
To Youth and Age, and travels on with cheer.
a. What does the poet mean by the phrase ‘in the dim past’?
b. Is the poet afraid of future? c. How can one travel on with cheer?
The word sonnet is derived from the Italian word “sonetto,” which means 
a ‘little song’ or ‘small lyric’. In poetry, a sonnet has 14 lines, and is written in 
'iambic pentameter' (A line with ten syllables, accented on every second beat). The 
first eight lines of a sonnet is known as “octave” and the last six lines is known as 
“sestet”. Sonnets can be categorized on the basis of their rhyme scheme.
So
n
n
et
About the Poet
Henry Van Dyke (1852 – 1933) was an American author, poet, 
educator, and clergyman. He served as a professor of English literature 
at Princeton University between 1899 and 1923. He was elected to 
the American Academy of Arts and Letters and received many other 
honours.
10th English_Book.indb   18 26-02-2019   16:24:02